# Valdres vs Jotai

## Introduction

Valdres was created due to performance issues encounterd building an offline
first process model editor. First with Recoil and then with Jotai due to the
apperent abandonment of the Recoil project.

Read more about the motivation behind Valdres
[here](/valdres/getting-started/motivation).

If you are a current Jotai user and want to quickly test out Valdres we have a
package that is API compatible with a majoritiy of the Jotai api. Read more here
[@valdres-react/jotai](/@valdres-react/jotai/).

## Similarities

### Storage

Jotai and Valdres have a similar approach to how atoms and selectors are stored
internally. They both use WeakMap. So if an atom or selector is no longer
referenced it can be garbage collected.

## Differences

### React implementation

For the React implementation Jotai and Valdres differ in how they handle
callbacks. Jotai is using a combination of `useEffect` and `useReducer` while
Valdres utilize `useSyncExternalStore`, similar to the Zustand library. (The
same developer has created both Zustand and Jotai)

### atom + selector

Jotai has a single concept for both state and derived state. While I do see some
benefits to that, we chose a similar apporach to Recoil where we seperate this
and keep stored state in atoms and derived/aggregated state in selectors. Based
on our experience building and app with several hundred atoms and selectors we
see a clear benfit to the mental model and the readability of the code.

### atomFamily/selectorFamily

In Jotai atomFamily is a simple uiltiy. In valdres we chose to make atomFamily
and selectorFamily first class citizens. The api is more similar to what Recoil
provides. In addition you can subscribe to an entire family and get a list of
all keys as an array to iterate over. (If you need control over the order you
still need to keep that in a seperate atom)

### Transactions

One thing Recoil pioneered and that I belive was a great feature was the ability
to do transactions on the state. We have brought this to Valdres. This is not an
explicit part of Jotai.
